# What Makes Remote Work Different
Working from home sounds exciting to a lot of people - minimal commute, increased flexibility, greater autonomy, better lighting. Software development offers more opportunities to work remotely than other types of jobs, and that is part of the appeal of this type of work for a lot of people. Startups in particular are often willing to create distributed teams, and as we saw in early 2020, larger companies can and will have to adapt to having employees work from home. This means that a greater number of people, some of whom never intended to work remotely, are now also working from home and may continue to do so long-term.
 
There are many guides for managers on how to get the best out of a remote team. What we’d like to do in this piece is help you, the employee, make the most of working remotely. Whether it’s what you planned to do all along or it’s an unexpected development in your career, this post can help you make the most of your time working from home.
 
There are three key topics to address here: _self-management_ (or time management, if you prefer), _communication and team dynamics_, and _visibility_. If you’re already working remotely, these are skills to develop for yourself. If you are currently interviewing for remote roles, these are policies to ask your prospective employers about.  
 
## Self-management
Flexibility is one of the most attractive parts of remote work; many people choose to work remotely solely because the idea of working when you want and where you want appeals to them. The flip side of this flexibility is that remote workers must hold themselves accountable for their time management skills and quality of work product without the oversight (read: someone watching you) found in most traditional offices. This places a new responsibility on the employee that they may not have expected, or may not be fully prepared for. Let’s take a look at self-management; namely, time management and accountability to your fellow team members. 
 
### Time management
To maximize your productivity and success as a remote worker, it’s critical to **make space** for your work, both physically and mentally. Designate a specific physical area as your workspace; this may be a part of your home, or part of a communal space. Either way, avoid working from your bed, couch, or any space you associate with relaxation or fun. Many companies offer expense accounts to set up a home office - use it! It’s a great signal to your brain that it’s time to work, which is how you create the mental space referenced above. It can also be an effective signal to the other people in your home that you are “at work” and should be treated as such. Figure out what works best for your environment. For example, you can wear headphones to signal you can’t be interrupted, or turn a specific light on or off when you’re “in the zone.” It sounds silly, but research has shown that small psychological signals like that can really help you focus when you need to.  
 
Of course, no one spends every single moment in an office working (shh, don’t tell anyone). You will need breaks, and should take them. This is why **schedules** are also very important. Look at your calendar and decide ahead of time when you’re going to break for food, or coffee, or a workout, and stick to it. This can change day to day, of course, but it’s very helpful to know ahead of time when you will be working and when you won’t be. This way you won’t find yourself rushing to finish several things at the end of each day and then feeling like you’re always working, which can lead to frustration and burnout. 
 
Some companies use time tracking software to record when you are and are not working; others require employees to be logged into certain communication systems and track when you’re active and when you are not. Regardless of your employer’s policies, it’s always a good idea for *you* to track when you’re working, and what you’re working on. It’s dead useful for our next section - accountability.   
 
### Accountability and deadlines
Another key component to successful remote work is accountability. Accountability is important to any job, really, but with remote work it bears special consideration. It can be easy to get lost in your own tasks and to forget about everything else. You’re a lone wolf, out there doing your thing! Except you’re not, not really. Depending on your role, certain people or entire departments may be waiting for your work product in order to complete theirs. In a regular office, these people could approach you and ask for things, and you would know when they were at their desks. If they needed something on Tuesday, you would have to get it to them before they left work on Tuesday. Remote work can make this turn on its head, leading you to think, well, it’s due when Tuesday *ends for me,* and if you’re in a different time zone or are the type who plans to finish everything after dinner, you’re not getting work to other people on time. This may seem like common sense, but it’s something that can trip up a lot of people on distributed teams. It requires discipline and communication that in-person managers usually enforce, but as remote workers, you must enforce these practices on your own. In doing so, you will be a much more efficient and successful member of your team and will eliminate stress from your own work day.  
 
### A quick note on tools
How you report to work, manage your time, and communicate with your team will depend in part on the tools that your company uses to manage you. Does your company communicate on Slack? Do you use Boomr to track your hours? Does your team document their workflow on Trello, Asana, Monday, etc.? While you must and should utilize your company-mandated tools to accomplish everything in this piece, you can experiment with tools that you use on your own as well. We are not going to prescribe specific tools for you, of course, but there is a good starting point on [this Zapier list of tools](https://zapier.com/learn/remote-work/productivity-apps-remote-work/) and [this Skillcrush list](https://skillcrush.com/blog/remote-work-tools/). Do not feel like you need to have a tool for everything when you begin; just take a look at the lists and keep them in mind as you figure out your own workflow, and how it fits into your team’s workflow. Amassing a larger toolkit than you need can backfire if you spend more time than necessary updating all of your tools.    
 
Once you have your setup, you should consider sharing it with your manager. Offering your manager visibility into your own tracking tools can be a huge help during performance reviews or 1:1s. Who knows, what you use may end up being what your whole team uses going forward!
 
## Communication and Team Dynamics
You’ve probably noticed that communication with your team runs through several of the topics we’ve already discussed. Keeping your team informed about what you’re working on, what you need from them, when deliverables will be ready, and what a charming genius you are are all vital parts of successful remote work. 
 
ASK ABOUT THE COMM POLICY - talk to your manager and team about how they like to communicate, how often, and when. If your team or company doesn’t have an established comm policy, it is all the *more* necessary to have this conversation. Propose one yourself if you have to, and document it, so that everyone knows what’s what. Teams that don’t communicate tend to collapse. 
OBSERVE MEETING ETIQUETTE - I know you don’t need more people in your life telling you to wear pants, but showing up to videoconference meetings looking prepared and professional makes a huge difference to your team, and, psychologically, to you. Turning on your laptop camera has also been shown to have a strong, positive effect on the productivity and efficacy of meetings (it ties into visibility, which we talk about more below). If it makes you feel self-conscious, you can always hide your own screen from your view so that you’re not staring at yourself! 
DELINEATE WORK AND SOCIAL - Your team communication channels may have one dedicated to casual conversation (for example, a #watercooler channel on Slack), or you may be able to create one or start each meeting with a few minutes of chatting. Not everyone loves small talk, but getting to know your colleagues and carving out opportunities to be social as well as get work done can have a major positive effect on your happiness at work. This ties in closely to:
REMEMBER, THEY’RE PEOPLE TOO - It can be easy to dismiss your remote teammates or allow yourself to get annoyed with them when they’re just names in a Slack community or faces on a Zoom call. Remember, they’re people too, and are juggling work and the challenges outlined above. As you would be polite and friendly in the office, find time to get to know as many people on your team as possible. Connection to coworkers is always #1 or #2 on the list of reasons why people like their jobs, so following these principles can materially increase your job satisfaction. 
 
## Visibility
A delicate frustration voiced by remote workers is the lack of visibility when it comes to decision-making and career advancement. This can be especially tough if the entire company is not distributed, meaning, some employees work remotely and some (or most) work in an office together. People who have worked in offices cite the importance of just seeing what’s going on around you, who’s in meetings with whom, and how other team members are being supported. When all of your communication is limited to invitation-based calls or Slack, this information can be difficult to obtain. 
 
Be in the conversations you need to be in. If you’re not sure what those are, ask your manager or team members. Participate and show your work. Very few people enjoy playing “the game” at work, but office politics are present even when there is no office. As always, we’re not telling you to change who you are - if you’re an introvert, there’s no need to suggest Margarita Mondays for the whole company. But remember to be your own advocate. For remote workers, it is especially important.
 
# More resources
The following articles offer perspectives on all of the topics covered in this piece (and a few more helpful ones). I’m not sure why 11 is apparently the popular number of tips for remote workers, but apparently it is! Please read all of these, as they offer some good insight into how to make the most of your remote work journey.  
 
* **Article:** [A Complete Guide to Working Remotely Like A Pro](https://www.paymoapp.com/blog/working-remotely/)
 
* **Article:** [11 Best Practices for Remote Work](https://usefyi.com/remote-work-best-practices/)
 
* **Article:** [11 Traits you need to be an effective remote worker](https://www.businessinsider.com/traits-remote-worker-work-from-home-2019-9#1-remote-workers-should-prioritize-clear-communication-when-emailing-and-messaging-coworkers-1)
 
* **Article:** [The Harvard Business Review on Remote Teams](https://hbr.org/2020/03/a-guide-to-managing-your-newly-remote-workers)
